---
layout: project
title: MAE 4300
description: Final Writeup
technologies: [Ethical Mindset]
image: /assets/images/ethics.jpg
---

# Boeing 737-MAX Ethical Case Study and Analysis

As engineers, it is our responsibility to approach each and every single project through the lens of a moral code of ethics that holds our work to the highest standards. By analyzing the two plane crashes involving the Boeing 737-MAX, we can identify points during the development of the aircraft at which this code of ethics fatally broke down. Each of these individual choices compounded and culminated in the tragedies that were the Lion Air and Ethiopian Airlines plane crashes, making the blame hard to place on a single person or team. The case study is an example of how a communication barrier between the different teams of a company, each with different objectives and functions to serve as a part of the company, can lead to critical errors in the engineering process. Conflicts between managerial goals and engineering constraints must be addressed at each stage of the development of a product, otherwise risking an incident similar to that of the Boeing 737-MAX.

For context, the Boeing 737-MAX was Boeing’s response to the new Airbus A320-NEO model which featured more efficient engines. Boeing sought to retrofit their current 737 model to incorporate these new engines, which would allow them to sidestep much of the regulation process that must happen for an entirely new plane model. These engines, however, created a weight imbalance on the plane that required engineers to create a second, new feature, entitled the MCAS, that would override the steering system and tilt the nose of the plane downwards to correct any stall arising from the engine. This system was prone to faults, as it only used data from one of the two sensors, and the sensors themselves often gave faulty readings. Pressures from management to uphold a strict timeline lead the engineers to intentionally overlook and cover up this design flaw and avoid proper testing of the product. Boeing, then, misled the FAA about the nature of the MCAS system. Avoiding this would allow Boeing to not have to provide pilots with any additional training, which the company had previously agreed to pay for.

The first clear ethical error on the part of Boeing as a whole was the extreme disconnect between the management team and Boeing’s engineers. Following a merger in 1997 with McDonnell Douglas, Boeing began to shift its primary goal towards turning large profits. Because of this, many senior engineers were removed from the management team to be replaced by those who could provide more input on how Boeing could operate from a business standpoint. The management team was then moved to Chicago, and engineers were relegated to a subclass of workers based in Seattle. The removal of engineers diminished the ability for those with the technical expertise needed to call out shortcomings in the products of the company to voice their concerns. Both Boeing and McDonnell Douglas likely initiated the merger with the intent of turning a profit, and Boeing itself spent billions of dollars to accomplish this merger, which likely explains why the company set its sights on making as much money as possible, but an engineering company must always balance the intention of earning money with the responsibility of providing a product that is safe for customer use. It is hard to place a clear blame in this specific problem, as the company, naturally, had to ensure that it was still maintaining the profits needed to continue operation, and the managers brought in to oversee that played no role in removing the engineering voices from the table.

Boeing’s communication with the Federal Aviation Administration, or lack thereof, also cannot be solely attributed to the company. In 2005, the FAA relaxed its regulation process due to the insurmountable amount of work required for it to review and approve every single aircraft used in service. It allowed companies to verify their own product. This meant that much of the ethical grey areas that arose around Boeing’s certification process were not actually illegal in any sense, but rather the company utilizing loopholes to reduce the costs and time incurred to approve the 737-MAX. To denounce this practice in this one case would be illogical, as most companies use a myriad of loopholes to dodge costs. This decision on the part of the FAA, however, did inevitably lead to Boeing’s deception and lack of disclosure about the full nature of the product. According to a document released by the DOJ in 2021, Boeing did admit to deceiving the FAA. While this should, rightfully, be blamed on Boeing for the most part, the FAA was clearly not well equipped to detect whether or not an independent company could or could not be presenting false information, which exposes an organizational failure on the part of the FAA. The FAA needs to be entirely aware of what they are allowing into the air, and if they are relying solely on the word of the companies they are in partnership with, then they are not doing their full due diligence as a government agency.

Boeing’s partnership with the FAA was not the only partnership in which Boeing showed a clear, ethical error. Boeing also agreed to compensate Southwest airlines for any additional training needed for the operation of their new airplanes. This incentive was a driving factor in the concealing of the MCAS system. Here, a portion of blame can be placed upon a pilot that agreed to sign off on the design and state that no further training would be required for the software. However, blame also falls to the engineers and the work culture set in place at Boeing. Whistleblowing was highly discouraged, and the workers felt as though they would not be protected if they were to come out against the MCAS implementation. The company, at both a managerial and engineering level, chose to press on ahead with the MCAS despite knowing it was not the safest it could be.

Because of this, the amount of communication entirely about the software is unknown. This makes it hard to identify who could entirely be at fault for Boeing’s next error. The company decided to sell a more cost-friendly version of the plane to lower-budget airlines that did not provide onboard visibility of the MCAS system, and whether or not it was in effect. This meant that when the MCAS malfunctioned on the Lion Air and Ethiopian Airlines flights, the pilots were not aware why their planes were continuously pointing the nose downwards and did not know what they needed to correct. This led the planes to both point their noses too far downwards and fly straight down into the ground. Boeing, initially, placed the blame on both of the pilots for not being able to correct this error, but it is more than reasonable to say that Boeing owns a significant amount of blame for this, as they were the ones who sold the version of the plane without proper visibility of the faulty system. Perhaps, a pilot ought to have been able to recognize the issue and avoid it from within the cockpit, but this lack of information is only exacerbated by the fact that the MCAS was knowingly omitted from the training manuals by Boeing. Not only was this system faulty and obscured from visibility on the cheaper models, but it was not properly documented, which raises the ethical question of if a company should be in charge of crafting their own training manuals. Would it be better if an independent third party was given the information ahead of the release of the aircraft such that they could create the training manuals based on their own set of safety standards? This, of course, sounds similar to the questions surrounding the role of the FAA, which then calls into question the uncertainty over whether or not even with an independent third party, Boeing could have still obscured information to avoid costs, or if these organizations could be subject to corruption themselves.

While many more ethical shortcomings existed during the Boeing 737-MAX fiasco, the few covered above showcase just how difficult it is to place a clear blame on any one entity. The decisions made by the management, the engineers, the FAA, the pilots, the product marketing team, or the team in charge of the contents of the training manual all came together to create the wicked problem that was the Boeing 737-MAX. Now, in the aftermath of the disasters, alongside other issues created by Boeing’s decades-long collapse of an adequate safety culture in their workplace, the company is tasked with the reconstruction of their public opinion and development process. From a forward-looking perspective, the company must first and foremost, prove to any and all stakeholders, ranging from their own workers to regulatory third parties to pilots that operate their equipment to the passengers that rely on their planes, that they are capable of producing trustworthy products and that ethics and safety will be held paramount as a core belief at their company. The ethical shortcomings at Boeing called into doubt not only their own products, but the safety of the air travel industry as a whole. Horror stories like that of the Boeing 737-MAX can dissuade many passengers from even flying in the first place. Especially with technologies that are hard to explain and understand for those who have not taken specialized training to understand the theories and principles behind their operation, being able to trust that those in charge of developing said technologies are placing safety as the top priority above all else is the key to widespread adoption. Boeing’s public failure of this hurt not only themselves but the airlines and businesses that rely on their products, as well. As Boeing continues to work to rebuild their image, we as future engineers within the industry must learn from these shortcomings and take with us these lessons into our work. We must always uphold ethical standards within the products we, as engineers, give to our communities, or else we risk making the same mistakes.



